TAPEDIR - Tape Directory Lister for the Color Microcomputer MC-10

This program reads all the files saved on a cassette and lists them
on the screen or a printer. It should recognize all standard MC-10 and 
Color Computer files, however, it will only run on an MC-10. 

Note: This program has not been tested on a real MC-10. It works as
expected on Virtual Aquarius. It should work on a real MC-10 when
listing to screen, but I suspect that the cassette and printer ports
may not interact as expected. 

Loading the Program

On a real MC-10, insert the cassette, type CLOAD "TAPEDIR" and press
ENTER, then press the play button on the cassette deck.

When using Virtual MC-10, type CLOAD "TAPEDIR" and press ENTER, then
select menu option File - Play Cassette File...  and open TAPEDIR.C10

Running the Program

Insert the cassette with the files to be listed and rewind it to the
beginning, if needed. Type RUN and press ENTER. The screen will show

  CASSETTE FILE DIRECTORY
  (S)CREEN OR (P)RINTER
  
Press S or P to select the output device. The screen will then show
  
  (F)ORMATTED OR (R)AW
  
Press F or R to select the output format. Finally, the screen will 
show

  PRESS PLAY ON TAPE
  
Press the play button on the cassette deck if using a real MC-10, or
select menu option File - Play Cassette File...  and open the desired
cassette image file if using Virtual MC-10.

As the cassette plays, the program will read the header of each file 
and print it to the screen or printer. If printer output out was 
selected the screen will ahow FOUND and the file name for each file
found.

When printing to screen, the program will pause each time the screen 
fills. When running on a real MC-10, the tape should be paused while
printing is paused.

Program Output

The program has two output options: Formatted, which prints the file
information as user-friendly text, and rRaw, which print the file 
header contents in hexadecimal format.

In Formatted mode, the directory is printed as follows:

           FILE DATA  EXEC  SIZE
  FILENAME TYPE TYPE  ADDR /LOAD
  MC10PROG BAS  BIN           58 
  MC10EXEC M/L  BIN  17920 17920 
  MC10SCRN M/L  BIN  <MC10 SCRN> 
  MC10ARRY VAR  BIN           55 
  COCOPROG BAS  BIN  <COCO PROG> 
  ASCIPROG BAS  ASC  <COCO PROG> 
  ASCIFILE DAT  ASC  <COCO FILE> 
  COCOEXEC M/L  BIN  10240*10240*
  COCOSCRN M/L  BIN  <COCO SCRN> 

  Filename:   The name of the file as used with an MC-10 CLOAD, CLOAD*,
              CLOADM, CSAVE, or CSAVE* statement, or a Color Computer
              CLOAD, CLOADM, CSAVE, CSAVEM, or OPEN statement.
  
  File Type:  The file type, which may be one of the following:

              BAS - MC-10 or Color Computer BASIC program. 
                    
              DAT - Color Computer data file, created by an OPEN "O",-1,... 
                    statement. 
                    
              M/L - MC-10 or Color Computer Machine language program.
                    
              VAR - MC-10 data file, created using the CSAVE* statement.

              *** - The file header contains an non-standard or illegal
                    file type. See Technical Information, below.
                    
  Data Type:  The format of the data stored in the file.
  
              ASC - The file contains ASCII text. This could be a Color
                    Computer DAT file or a BAS file created using the
                    CSAVE "filename",A command. The MC-10 does not
                    recognize ASCII files. Although the MC-10 might
                    CLOAD a BASIC program saved as ASCII without reporting
                    an error, the result will be unusable.
                                 
              BIN - The file contains Binary data. This could be an M/L
                    file, a VAR file, or a BAS file saved using the 
                    CSAVE "filename" command. Although the MC-10 and
                    Color Computer will each CLOAD a BASIC program 
                    written for the other, the program will not run or
                    list correctly, unless the tokens are converted.
              
              *** - The file header contains an non-standard or illegal
                    data type. See Technical Information, below.


  Exec Addr:  For M/L files, the program execution address. 

  Size/Addr:  For BAS and VAR files, the size of the file data in bytes.
              For M/L files, the load address of the program.
              
              If a Color Computer file is detected, the text <COCO FILE>
              will be displayed in the last two columns. 

              If the file type is M/L, the last two columns will contain 
              <MC10 SCRN> if the load address is 16384 and file size is
              512, or <COCO SCRN> if the load address is 1024. Otherwise, 
              an asterisk will appear to the left of either address if it 
              is outside of the MC-10's available memory.

In Raw mode, the directory is printed as follows:

  FILENAME FT DT GF EXEC LOAD
  MC10PROG 00 00 00 4C00 003A
  MC10EXEC 02 00 00 4600 4600
  MC10SCRN 02 00 00 0000 4000
  MC10ARRY 04 00 00 4C00 0037
  COCOPROG 00 00 00 0000 0000
  ASCIPROG 00 FF FF 4F20 4241
  ASCIFILE 01 FF FF 4F20 4241
  COCOEXEC 02 00 00 2800 2800
  COCOSCRN 02 00 00 0000 0400

  FT - File Type: 00 for a Basic program, 01 for a CoCo data file, 
       02 for a machine language program, or 04 for an MC-10 data file.

  DT - Data Type: 00 for a binary file, or FF for an ASCII file.

  GF - Gap Flag: 00 if there areno gaps between file blocks, or 
       FF if there is a leader between each file block.
       
  EXEC - The execution address as a four digit hexadecimal number.

  LOAD - The load address/file size as a four digit hexadecimal number.

Non-standard and custom headers:

  

Stopping the Program

Since the MC-10 can not detect the end of a cassette, the program will
continue running until the RESET button is pressed. 

Alternatively, the program will stop running if it encounters an End
of Tape Marker, which is a file with CHR$(255) as the first character
of the file name. The End of Tape marker can be written by pressing
the play and record buttons on the tape deck, then typing RUN 210 and
pressing ENTER.

Technical Information

When SKIPF reads a file header, it stores it in the file header buffer,
which contains the following fields.

 Offset   Address     Decimal    Name    Description
    0    425F-4266     16991     FNAME   File Name 
    8      4267        16999     FTYPE   File Type 
    9      4268        17000     DTYPE   Data Type 
   10      4269        17001     GAPFLG  Gap Flag  
   11    426A-426B  17002-17003  XOFS    Exec Offset
   13    426C-426D  17004-17005  LAL     Load Address

File Types are 0 for a Basic program (BAS), 1 for a data file (DAT),
2 for a machine language program (M/L), and 4 for an array file (VAR).

Data Types are 0 for a binary file and 255 for an ASCII file.

Gap Flag is either 0 for no gaps between blocks or 255 for a leader
between each block.

If any of these fields contain a value not listed, the header and or
file were not created by a Basic statement.
 
Exec Offset is the execution address for machine language programs. 
For all other file types it will be an unpredictable value.

Load Address is the starting address for machine language programs.
For MC-10 Basic programs and array files it is the file length. For 
all other file types it will be an unpredictable value.
